[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Hello.
My name is Linda Rachel.
And welcome to the
"World of Wisdom."
Today we have, as our
special guest, Guy Finley,
who is the author of a new
book, "The Intimate Enemy."
Guy, welcome to our show.
>> Thank you.
>> Today I'd like for us to talk
a little bit about your book.
But if you would,
if you could give us
a little bit of a
background about how
you got into this field of
self-help and self-discovery,
what was it in your own
background that brought you
to this realization?
>> Well, I don't know
of a specific instance.
It was, for me, from the
time that I was small enough
to recognize that there was
these terrible inconsistencies
between the people
that I was raised with,
and around what they
said was good and true,
and how they felt,
and how they acted,
there was this huge gulf
that I couldn't reconcile.
And as I continued to
grow up, I continued
to have more and
more experiences that
proved to me that, taken at
face value, just what you see
and what you're
told, that I would
make a terrible
mistake if I tried
to find myself in that life.
And so it became imperative that
I begin reading and studying.
And I traveled.
And it's been one sort of a
wild, fruitful, and grateful
adventure for me,
this spiritual life.
>> Well, and your father was
a pioneer in radio, talk show.
>> Yes.
>> And and you grew up
in Hollywood, around--
>> (SINGING) Hollywood.
>> And with these people
as you were growing up,
do you think that had a major
influence on your life then?
>> I like to think that the
advantage that I had was that--
and how do I say this?
I'm not being acrimonious.
This is not putting
anything down,
but I was born at the
top of the garbage heap.
I was.
I had every advantage
a child could have.
I was raised in an
affluent family.
My father, whenever, wherever
we went-- it wasn't just radio.
He invented late-night
television talk
show before Jack Paar
and Johnny Carson.
And so I had an access
to a world that,
by and large, everyone on this
planet, in one way or another,
aspires to, almost everyone.
And yet there I
was, and all I saw
was anger, and fear, and
nervousness, and addictions
of one kind or another, a dis--
to use a popular word--
one giant, dysfunctional
society that I could see I
don't belong here.
Because it's not doing
anything for them.
Why would I go into it?
And if I don't go
into that, which
in one respect, the creative,
social ladder towards the top
of the world, where do you go?
So it turned out to be not
outward for me, but inward.
And that, it did drive
the point home for me.
>> I think one of the problems
that many people in the world
see today, and
especially parents,
is that outwardly they
are living lives that
aren't fulfilled, and
they're not finding meaning.
They're trying to find meaning
through attachment to things,
the money, the work,
or recognition.
And the young people
who are coming up
see that this isn't bringing
them that necessary element
of self-importance.
And how do we speak
to these parents
and to these young people?
>> Well, to begin with, what
you're saying is so true.
There is such a
disenfranchisement.
And the younger people are so
disenchanted with the world
that we're getting
ready to hand them.
And yet don't you see?
The same-- it just
keeps repeating itself.
One of the things
that I talk about
is what it means to learn.
How can you tell anyone
what they should do?
All right, let's
make this personal.
I hope I don't get too personal.
>> No, it's fine.
>> Have you ever been really
in a bad mood or depressed?
And then a friend
called, and they said,
I'm in the worst way.
What can you do?
How can you help me?
And then you just pick
yourself up off the floor.
And here you are telling
someone else what
to do to make their life work.
And we don't see any
contradiction in that.
I'm suicidal, and you call me.
And the next thing I know,
I'm telling you what to do,
how to be a happy person.
See, it takes a healthy person
to help a person get healthy.
So our work is a self-work.
It's an individual work.
And it is not a selfish work.
This is one thing I
hear all the time.
Well, isn't this
selfish if you just
work for yourself, and on
yourself, and toward yourself?
Yes and no.
It's selfish if the end result
is that somehow or other
I think I'm going to be some
glorified being, that flowers
are going to bloom behind me
when I walk down the street.
But if the work that I'm
doing is educating me
to the fact that within me
is dwelling something that
can't wait to give bad
information because it makes
me look good, that can't
wait to believe in itself
as an answer to a present
pain that I have, then
I can begin to do
for my children
and for the young
people that I'm
involved with what no
one has done for them,
which is simply tell the truth.
Say, look, things aren't right.
And I know that I'm part
of what isn't right.
But by God, and I
mean that reverently,
I am beginning to
understand what
I need to do to put it right.
And it begins with stopping
this blame business.
And it begins with the end of
this investment that all of us
have in the next thrill,
the next excitement.
I mean, when's it going to end?
Because if you look at
the pattern of things,
the way the world is
going, our thrill meter
is escalating and escalating
to the point where,
my god, the things you
can see on television now,
and it looks like it's
broadcast from hell itself.
And we don't notice
the difference
because we need
increasing thrills
to get us through the
disenfranchisement
and the disenchantment we
have with our present life.
So the beginning of it is for
the children, for human adults,
to start being honest,
to start saying,
look, I didn't do it right.
And now I'm going to work
to find out what is true.
You don't have to
follow me, but let's
you and I agree to
learn what is true.
And if we'll do
that, then, surely,
fearlessness, confidence,
and real success will follow.
And it will because we're
willing to put the truth first.
>> I think part of the problem
is that we are afraid of not
having all the answers.
>> Oh, you hit a big one.
>> And we're afraid
of not being right.
>> Oh, you hit a big one.
But you know what?
Does fear know
anything intelligent?
See, that's the intimate enemy.
I'm afraid not to
know the answer.
Therefore, I will supply
myself with any answer
that seems to fit the moment.
Take the drink.
Say the cruel thing.
Buy the thing you can't afford.
Agree that loneliness is
your doom and the prophecy
for the rest of your life.
Because that answer, at least,
I recognize myself within it.
The truth is that who we
are doesn't need an answer
it recognizes as being true
because the very absence
of fear is truth.
So you see the difference?
One, I'm listening to fear tell
me what answers are possible,
what will work, where I
can find myself and be safe
finding myself that way.
The other answer shows me that
fear can't know anything good,
and to drop the
fear, and then allow
the momentary loss of myself--
listen to this-- to be replaced
with a new sense of self that
floods into me that
is free of the fear
that I was having
a moment before.
I don't have to protect myself.
>> Well, do you
think that this is--
what is the opposite of fear?
Is it love?
>> Ah.
Yes and no.
In this world-- and we
can just put it this way.
Right now, what
happens is a person
goes through a terrible
moment of some kind.
Let's say they're
afraid of their future.
So they come up with
the idea, and they
start doing this imagination
work where they're coming up
with a loving scene,
the sound of the waves,
and all of the things that
we use as affirmations.
And that has a
place, for instance,
in healing the physical body.
There are certain techniques
visually that are important.
But when it comes to
freeing ourselves,
which has be the aim--
because without freedom,
there can't be love--
then that kind of
love is not something
that comes to us out of
resisting a painful state.
See, we tend to want God,
love, Christ, light in our life
when we tend to have
the darkness, the fear,
and the worries.
And these moments where,
suddenly, I'm looking out,
and I want to have truth.
I want to walk in
the steps of Jesus
or whatever it is that I
say is this truthful life.
In that moment, I am actually
being sent out, as it were,
from a fearful state.
And my longing for this
moment where I won't be afraid
perpetuates the fear itself.
It takes true
spiritual courage that
is born out of spiritual
wisdom, spiritual knowledge,
to recognize that if
I plant a lemon seed,
I'm going to grow a lemon tree--
and not know whether or not
a peach tree is going to grow
but, by God, refuse to
water the lemon seed.
And when you start doing
that, the weed seed dies.
And in its place, believe
me-- you know the manna that
came down to Moses?
You know, the water from the
rock, all of that business?
It's already there.
All we have to do is get
the garden freed and cleared
of all the stuff that
the wrong parts of us,
that the intimate enemy, keep
us nourishing, and fertilizing,
and then sustaining
ourselves on,
which only sustains that
wrong part of ourself.
>> Well, is denial a big part
of the intimate enemy in that we
deny that we have a
problem with something,
or that we deny that
we are at war at all,
just by saying that
it's not there,
that we hope that
it's going to go away.
>> Denial is a large river
that runs through the--
no.
It's a joke-- denial.
OK.
Denial.
>> I get it.
>> Denial is a huge
part of this problem.
It is part of the machine that
drives the circle of self.
And what is denial other than--
let's take a negative state.
Denial is on the
false part of myself,
this intimate
entity, the refusal
that says, oh, boy I better--
gee, if I go into that meeting
dressed in this outfit--
this is just a simple example--
everybody's going to
see that I'm an idiot.
And believe me, and
people maybe they
think that they
don't think that way.
We're always concerned
with the way we look.
Well, how many times have you
and I dressed to the nines,
to use an old expression.
And instead of being more
comfortable in a meeting,
found ourselves
more uncomfortable?
Well, denial is something
that operates in us when
we refuse to see that
that solution to that pain
doesn't provide any real relief.
So what do we do?
We just keep going
back through it.
But what's the machinery in
it is that the pain comes up,
and the fear comes up, and
it says, but you have to.
You've got to change that shirt.
You've got to do this.
You gotta do that.
And that pain drives
us around and around
and around, and we deny the
fact that that answer works.
If we could wake
up a little bit,
we'd see that answer doesn't
work, drop it, and go on
to something that
does, which is letting
go of the whole wrong
idea that who we are
depends upon what other
people think about us,
just as one example.
>> We're going to
take a little break.
And we'll come
back and go further
into the insights of
"The Intimate Enemy."
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Welcome to the
"World of Wisdom."
We're here with Guy Finley,
author of "The Intimate Enemy."
And we're talking about
some of the insights
in helping us to understand the
negative states that we find
ourselves in and to
understand how we can
take charge of our thoughts.
Guy, it's nice to have you here.
>> Thank you.
>> Guy, one of the things that
we've talked about is the fact
that some of the thoughts that
we have can seem to multiply,
and almost like multiple
personalities that we have
as they take control of
us or take charge of us.
We even have expressions
like, the devil made me do it,
or I don't know
what got into me.
Just something came over me.
>> Right.
>> I don't know why I thought
that way or why I said that
thing.
>> Right.
>> How is it that we can take
charge of these negative states
that we get in?
>> The simple answer is by
getting sick and tired of being
someone who always feels sick
and tired after they've done
something they
didn't want to do.
And really, the spiritual
life, in a way, is very simple.
I like to say that the child
finds the classroom when he
or she tires of the playground.
Our sense of self that comes
from having said stupid things
to someone else or to ourselves,
the sense of that self,
eventually, it gets so
wearisome, so tired.
You get so tired of being
tired and frightened and tired
of being anxious.
At a certain point,
that's the simple answer.
But there are
spiritual principles.
There are great truths
that are available
for a sincere
individual that can
lend to that person certain--
and I'm going to hesitate
to use the word "powers"
because it's not their power
any more than it's the plane's
power that lifts it.
The rules for being
lifted exist already,
just as the hawk uses
the solar eddies to rise.
Well, when you go out and you
look at a beautiful sunset,
in the moment of that awareness,
are you not exchanging
something with that sunset?
Isn't there, in the awareness,
an energy that you bring to it,
and that the sunset
itself has, and that there
is a definite exchange that
takes place between you
and the thing you're aware of?
Is that right?
Or you agree with me?
>> Right.
>> OK.
That means that at
the moment that I
can be aware of anything,
it is possible for me
to experience an
exchange of energy
because of the awareness.
It's like an inlet into
a tide, into an ocean.
That awareness
produces an exchange.
And in the exchange,
I can taste what
it is that I am in
relationship with,
which means, Linda, is that is
I can start wanting to be awake,
and then being aware
of myself, and wishing
to have that relationship
with life instead of the one
where I'm always trying
to prove myself in life.
I can start to taste
directly what these thoughts
and feelings are really doing.
Thoughts and feelings either
serve us or they steal from us.
Our problem right now is we
don't know the difference.
Being awake and aware
allows us to start
at least discerning
the difference
between these energetic states
that are giving us something
or that are taking
something away from us.
And this has to be
experienced, but all of us
have the features
and the capability
to do this kind of
inner self-discovery.
>> In your book, you talk about,
it's an expression, TPICs.
>> The Temporary
Person in Charge, TPIC.
>> Temporary person in charge.
>> Right.
>> And this temporary
person in charge,
or it's the temporary
thought in charge?
Or--
>> Yeah, that's a
way of putting it.
This idea of a temporary
person in charge is not new.
There's nothing
new under the sun.
The Sufi's, for instance,
call it a commanding self.
But the essence of it is, as
with all teachings have always
talked about, that we have
within us multiple selves.
We are not a unified being that
is capable of being directed.
A whole new series of
thoughts just came to me.
Here we want have a
relationship with God.
Well, which one
of us is it going
to be in relationship
with, the one who loves him
or the one who doesn't think
about him because it's thinking
about money or sex or whatever?
See?
So all of these divided natures
waiting their opportunity
to get hold of my
mouth and my mind
until certain circumstances
allow that relationship
to exist.
And then, all of a sudden,
I'm this kind of person.
I'm out at a party.
And I'm whatever it is.
And then the next
day, I am someone
who is beating himself up for
being such an exhibitionist.
Or I'm at a meeting,
and I'm taking charge.
And the next day, I don't
want to go to the meeting
because I don't know who I
am, and I'm afraid someone
will see I'm stupid.
All these rotating
personalities,
and every one of them
has my life for as long
as it's in charge of me.
The answer is not to
dominate one rotating self
with another rotating self.
It's to see the presence
of these multiple selves,
these energetic states,
as being what they are,
which is not a self
but something that
is lending a certain
energy to me that
produces a sense of myself
that I'm deriving my life from.
Then from that awareness,
a whole new eye,
a whole new self starts
to reveal itself.
And incidentally, this is what
that line is created with.
This is how God gets
in touch with us
is through that part of
us that has laid down
all the other parts, in
a manner of speaking.
>> Well, you know, a lot of
times when people are talking
today in the area of self-help,
they're saying positive
thinking.
And you're going to
think positively.
And that, eventually, you
will get to that point,
even if you don't feel that
way that you should just
go ahead and think that way.
What do you think about that?
>> Well, it connects with
what I was saying earlier.
If I wake up in the morning,
and I look in the mirror,
and I say, you're so strong.
You're so strong.
You're good looking.
You're going to make it.
Everything's OK.
Everything is OK.
Where does that thought
come to me from?
What is it that urges
me to say something
like that if not the fear that
I am not those things now.
See, that's what I mean by these
secret pair of opposites living
inside of this intimate enemy.
I think to myself, boy, I'm
really not worth anything.
But I don't catch that thought.
Instead, I catch that
thought's extension,
which says I better
affirm how good I am.
Well, if I affirm how
good I am, and it's
the secret opposite of the fear
that I'm not good enough, what
is really being
strengthened other
than this secret, sad,
self-defeating picture
I have of myself as
not being good enough?
Linda, you and I are
not thought creatures.
We are creatures that are given
a gift of thought through which
we can communicate and
extend our understanding
of the physical
universe that we're in.
But we are intended to be
human beings that are being.
What man taking thought can
add one cubit to his stature?
That means we are not
intended to grow in thought.
We are intended to grow in a
nature by its expanded presence
allows different qualities of
thoughts to come in and out
and for us to choose what
serves us and see what doesn't.
>> So it's a matter of
observing our thoughts,
observing our fears, and
just taking a look at them,
where it's putting our
attention to them--
>> Yes, yes.
>> --whether it
feels good or not.
>> Yes.
It's really that simple.
To become awake, aware
of ourselves-- and see,
it's popular today that
you shouldn't be afraid.
Well, that's like saying you
shouldn't be a human being.
Because the human being
is a very unique creature
upon this Earth that the
higher and lower meet within.
Heaven and hell connect
in a certain place,
and we can call it
our consciousness.
So here is all of
this kind of energy,
and here's all this
kind of energy.
But we have something in us
that can be awake and aware
and choose what it serves, what
it is in relationship with.
And we must understand
the necessity
for doing the kind
of spiritual work
that produces within us, first,
the need to be different,
and, in the awakened need,
the new relationship that need
produces with what
can help us become
different kind of human beings.
And my book is an
interactive book.
And by that I mean it is loaded
with ways in which individuals
can take certain ideas,
certain principles,
and see them at
work within them.
>> Well, that is a message I
think that we all need to hear.
And we thank you
so much for being
with us today and for
sharing your book with us.
>> I couldn't have
been in a better place.
>> Thank you.
"The Intimate
Enemy," Guy Finley.
Thank you for joining
the "World of Wisdom."
I'm Linda Rachel.
And until next time,
may each of your moments
be filled with wisdom.